# A Study on the Relationship between Social Presence, Emotional Facial Behaviour and Flow in Multiplayer Game Experiences

This GitHub Repository holds Michele Fanelli's master's thesis document and the respective experimentation data results. 

The auxiliary Google Colab Notebook can be found at https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1DsX_8wAfXJLLnXCufVU-APuMu5wSpDGt?usp=sharing

The data results in spreadsheet format can be found at https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1QeCm-X-sdr1-n0wnkMeGKNS2EDrQwCAaxydj1pNlzw4/edit?usp=sharing

## Summary

This master’s thesis was inspired by the observation made by Chet Falizek regarding the playtesting of Portal 2, wherein playtesters reportedly expressed appreciation for the comedic aspects of the single-player mode, yet exhibited no facial expression during gameplay, while conversely, they smiled and laughed during the playtesting of the multiplayer game mode, despite the absence of any direct form of communication with other players. These claims sparked curiosity and prompted an inquiry into the physiological effects of flow and social presence, and their reciprocal influence on each other.

Flow is a highly desirable mental state characterized by cognitive efficiency, effortless focus, intrinsic motivation and entailing complete absorption in the activity, with the exclusion of all irrelevant thoughts and emotions. The evidence linking flow to talent development and creative accomplishments has made this state of mind a general academic focus, as well as a key requirement in shaping the notion of challenge within game design. During the state of flow, it is not uncommon to present an immobile face, as usually within activities devoid of social interaction, the mental faculties typically allocated to facial expressions are subdued, as cognitive resources are redirected towards the task at hand. The variance in the presence of facial expressions within the playtesting of the two game modes has been interpreted as an effect of social play.

Social play, happening whenever more than one player interacts with a game at once, has been studied extensively for how it affects game experiences, by facilitating and enlivening social interaction, as well as serving as a major motivator for individuals to engage in digital gaming due to its innate ability to fulfil a fundamental human need for social connection. The last two decades of game research have highlighted the contribution of social interactions in shaping the game experience, providing evidence that social play leads to greater enjoyment and immersion, elicits higher emotional levels, spurs cooperation, lowers hostility and turns failure into enjoyable experiences. Such findings prompted researchers to emphasise the interplay between game content and social interactions and to advocate for recognizing digital gaming technology as social presence technology. 

Social presence is the subjective experience of feeling in the presence of another social entity and perceiving their thoughts and emotions, a concept that has long been a primary goal of networked communication systems as it has a reliable augmentator of immersion and enjoyment. Of the three dimensions that compose social presence, digital games seem to be natural vectors of two, copresence and behavioural involvement, and facilitators of one, psychological involvement. Results of games research showcase the impact of social presence on the experience, as it has been observed to increase engagement and positive emotional responses, as well as being in a predictive relationship with empathy, emotional expression and the general synchronization of participants’ physiological responses. Studies investigating the influence of winning and losing on perceived social presence among teammates found that, while the game outcome doesn’t affect social presence within competitive goal structures, there is a significant relationship between the two in cooperative games, suggesting either that winning enhances cooperative social presence or that low social presence undermines team coordination. As research continues to explore the multifaceted effects of social presence, its significance in shaping game experiences becomes increasingly clear, as well as the importance of further academic inquiry. The Social Presence in Gaming Questionnaire (SPGQ) has been developed for such purpose, to measure social presence in game experience research, capturing the latent variables of psychological involvement (empathy and negative feelings) and behavioural involvement. 

Faliszek's claims were thus formalized and restructured into three research questions: “Is it possible to perceive social presence in a multiplayer game experience even with close to no communication?”, “Is there a relationship between perceived social presence and a more visible facial emotional behaviour?” and “Is it possible for a player to perceive both social presence and the state of flow?” To attempt to answer these inquiries, an investigation was conducted in which players were isolated in separate rooms with no means of communication and asked to engage in the same digital game initially against a computer-controlled opponent and subsequently against the other isolated players. The experiment was meticulously crafted to optimize the perceivable social presence by incorporating factors documented in research to have a beneficial impact. This included selecting a digital game deemed effective in fostering social presence and explicitly informing participants about the identity of their playing partner (whether computer-controlled or human). Through self-reports, physiological metrics, and observational data, the psychophysiological responses of participants were analyzed in order to reach three goals: (1) identifying a statistically significant difference in the self-reported social presence scores between the computer-controlled agent setting and the human-controlled avatar setting, (2) identifying a statistically significant relationship between the self-reported social presence scores and the correspondent facial action units activation values, and (3) identifying a statistically significant relationship between the self-reported social presence and the flow scores.

The study employed a few scales from the Game Experience Questionnaire (GEQ), the Social Presence in Gaming Questionnaire (SPGQ) and the Hexad-12 user types questionnaire for the measurement of the subjective experiences, which allowed to identify a significant variation in the central tendency of two of the three social presence scales between the computer-controlled agent setting and the human-controlled avatar setting, and a significant positive relationship between the variation of the psychological involvement dimensions and the flow dimension. The participants’ facial behaviour has been studied quantitatively and qualitatively through facial action unit extraction software and observation, which allowed the identification of a significant variation of central tendency in the overall facial behaviour, and more specifically with higher values for the muscle groups associated with smiling and with reacting in acceptance or disbelief. 

Although the findings are indeed promising, it is important to note that the investigation encountered certain difficulties during both the preparation and the conduction of the experiment. It is hypothesized that conducting the study within a dedicated testing facility and utilizing the digital game described in the methods, i.e. a digital game characterized by a cooperative game goal structure and a gameplay loop necessitating ongoing asymmetric communication, would give even more compelling results. Moreover, it is imperative to remark that participants were informed of the nature of their playing partner, which is a non-negligible strong form of priming. It is unclear whether the observed outcomes stem from the actual presence of another sentient social entity or from participants' belief in interacting with such an entity. Therefore, repeating the experiment with control groups and placebos is essential for elucidating these aspects further.

This study has shed some light on the multifaceted relationship between social presence, facial emotional behaviour and the state of flow in multiplayer gaming experiences. While the findings provide valuable insights into how interaction with another sentient social entity affects subjective experiences and physiological responses, much remains unexplored, as more open questions emerge concerning the role of priming and of the game goal structure and mechanics. More research on these topics could enrich our understanding of the nuanced interplay between social play and game mechanics, thus advancing the academic and practitioner knowledge of game research and game design. In the presentation that motivated this work, Faliszek joked “[i]f you're going to do a comedy game, make it co-op, because otherwise you're gonna have years of misery and self-doubt as you watch it playtested” (2016, 31:25). The analysed results seem to support these claims as the idea of being playing with another human entity leads to smiling more, as well as feeling more engaged, affected and empathetically connected, even devoid of any form of communication. Consequently, a game attempting to tap into social play’s potential, may not need to establish traditional means of communication, but could instead endeavour creatively to find uncommon means. Additionally, were the role of priming studied further, the game designing focus on the multiplayer paradigm could shift to making the player feel like they are interacting with other human entities, rather than just entities. Several possible interpretations can be given to the results of this study.
